CHAPTERS XIII and XIV of the Gospel of St. Luke in the authorized version commonly called
the King James Version.
CHAPTERS XIII and XIV
There were present at that season some that told him of the Galileans whose blood Pilate
had mingled with their sacrifices. And Jesus, answering, said unto them,
Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered
such things? I tell you nay. But except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. O those
the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that
dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you nay. But except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
He spake also this parable. A certain man had a fig-tree planted in his vineyard, and
he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. Then said he unto the dresser of his
vineyard, Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree, and find none.
Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground? And he answering, said unto him,
Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it and dung it, and if it
bear fruit well. And if not, then after that thou shalt cut it down.
And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath.
And behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was
bowed together, and could in no wise lift up herself. And when Jesus saw her, he called
her to him, and said unto her, Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity. And he laid
his hands on her, and immediately she was made straight and glorified God.
And the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation, because that Jesus had healed
on the Sabbath day, and said unto the people, There are six days in which men ought to work,
in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day.
The Lord then answered him, and said, Thou hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the
Sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering? And ought not
this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound low these eighteen years,
be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day? And when he had said these things, all his
adversaries were ashamed, and all the people rejoiced for all the glorious things that
were done by him.
Then said he, Unto what is the kingdom of God like, and whereunto shall I resemble it?
It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and cast into his garden, and it
grew and waxed a great tree, and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of it.
And again he said, Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God? It is like leaven, which
a woman took and hid in three measures of meal till the whole was leavened.
And he went through the cities and villages, teaching and journeying toward Jerusalem.
Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto them, Strive
to enter in at the straight gate, for many I say unto you will seek to enter in and shall
not be able. When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and
ye begin to stand without and knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and
he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are. Then shall ye begin to
say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. But he
shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence ye are. Depart from me, all ye workers of
iniquity. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham and Isaac
and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out. And
they shall come from the east and from the west, and from the north and from the south,
and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. And behold there are last which shall be first,
and there are first which shall be last. The same day there came certain of the Pharisees
saying unto him, Get thee out and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee. And he said unto
them, Go ye and tell that fox, behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures to-day and to-morrow
and the third day I shall be perfected. Nevertheless I must walk to-day and to-morrow and the day
following, for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
which killest the prophets and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I
have gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings,
and ye would not. Behold your house is left unto you desolate, and verily I say unto you,
ye shall not see me until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in
the name of the Lord.
Chapter 14
And it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread
on the Sabbath-day, that they watched him. And behold, there was a certain man before
him which had the dropsy. And Jesus, answering, spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying,
Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath-day? And they held their peace. And he took him and
healed him, and let him go. And answered them, saying, Which of you shall have an ass or
an ox fallen into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the Sabbath-day? And they
could not answer him again to these things. And he put forth a parable to those which
were bidden, when he marked how they chose out the chief rooms, saying unto them, When
thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room, lest a more
to thee, give this man place, and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room. But when
thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room, that when he that bade thee cometh,
he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher. Then shalt thou have worship in the presence
of them that sit at meet with thee. For whoever exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that
shall be exalted.
Then said he also unto him that bade him, When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call
not thy friends nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen nor thy rich neighbours, lest
they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. But when thou makest a feast,
call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, and thou shalt be blessed, for they cannot
recompense thee, for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.
And when one of them that sat at meet with him heard these things, he said unto him,
Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God. Then he said unto him, A certain
man made a great supper and bade many, and sent his servants at supper time to say to
them that were bidden, Come, for all things are now ready.
And they all with one consent began to make excuse. The first said unto him, I have bought
a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it. I pray thee have me excused. And another
said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them. I pray thee have me excused.
And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.
So that servant came, and showed his lord these things. Then the master of the house
being angry, said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and
bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.
And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded, and yet there is room.
And the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel
them to come in, that my house may be filled. For I say unto you, that none of those men
which were bidden shall taste of my supper. And there went great multitudes with him,
and he turned and said unto them, If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother,
and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple.
For which of you intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost
whether he have sufficient to finish it? Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation,
and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man began
to build, and was not able to finish. Or what king, going to make war against another king,
sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that
cometh against him with twenty thousand? Or else, while the other is yet a great way off,
he sendeth an embassage, and desireth conditions of peace. So likewise, whosoever he be of
you, that forsaketh not all he hath, he cannot be my disciple. Salt is good, but if the salt
have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is neither fit for the land,
nor yet for the dung-hill, but men cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.